Noriega and Hussein have the following
common they are living proof that the
United States no longer has to search
the world for enemies they are the proof
that we are now investing in their
development both Noriega of course was
working and Hussein were close allies of
the United States Oh Diego working with
the CIA very closely in Panama and
Hussein supported by the United States
all through the 1980s in his war with
Iran well I mentioned Hussein because I
want to make some comments on the Gulf
crisis in the war something that you're
not going to find in the straight media
or the so-called mainstream US media we
all know really why or the official
interpretation or reasons of why the
United States went into this war we were
responding on moral principle on
political principle we were preserving
our way of life
our access to the petroleum resources of
the Persian Gulf I remember at one point
James Baker made the comment that jobs
are at stake with the Hussein takeover
of Kuwait there were a lot of different
stories put out over the months before
the shooting war started especially
before the UN resolution at the end of
November giving the same until January
15th to move out of Kuwait or else force
would be used well there's an alternate
alternative interpretation this is the
interpretation that is founded on the
belief that the Bush administration that
is the president and his very closest
advisors had determined that a world
crisis was needed in order to replace
the 40 odd year old crisis in Western
Europe that is the Soviet threat which
had largely largely disappeared with the
collapse of communism in Eastern Europe
and with the chaos that has followed in
the Soviet Union this crisis in Western
Europe was used you know
for more than 40 years at least since
1950 to justify the permanent war
economy in the United States that is
having military spending as the motor of
the US economy it wasn't this way always
but today we have that as a reality and
we've had it for quite some time the
official figure you know for military
spending in the United States that is
last year was that 26 percent of the
budget went to defense or military but
in that calculation of 26 percent they
don't include a lot of things which are
extremely important such as interest on
the national debt from past military
expenditures the retirement programs for
tens of thousands of former Department
of Defense employees a whole series of
categories of military related
activities but which are not included in
order to keep that figure down to 26
percent analysts estimate that the
figure for military spending is far more
than 50 percent of the national budget
of the federal budget
some people like gore Vidal put it at
two-thirds of the national budget as
going for defense related activities
well this had its beginning back in 1950
it was the application of or increase in
military expenditures in order to
resolve economic problems at home during
those first five years after the end of
World War two in 1945 to 1950 the United
States economy the GNP had declined by
20% and unemployment had gone from
nearly nothing that is 700,000 to
something like 4.7 million in Washington
at the highest levels this was the
Truman administration time at the
highest levels there was extreme fear
that the United States was going to like
return to the condition of the Great
Depression of the 1930s in order to
avoid that the decision was taken to
rearm the United States and Western
Europe that that is it would be financed
by US tax
Faiers through the federal government it
wasn't initially successful the outline
for this program and the world analysis
which contained it was a top-secret
document for 25 years and only in 1975
was it by accident Declassified and made
public it was a mistake on the part of
the government they wanted to keep it
secret and someone made a a terrible
mistake but the document is known as NS
C 68 and it was prepared by Paul knit C
who was then the chief of the policy
planning staff of the Department of
State Paul Nitze the same Paul Smith see
who in the 1980s was one of the chief
disarmament advisors to President Reagan
and Vice President Bush then well this
document in diverse and I have which was
published in an Naval War College review
runs to about 50 pages I think and it is
an entire analysis of the whole world
the east-west problems and of the US
economy and the key phrase from that
document was this the United States and
other free nations will within a period
of a few years at most experienced a
decline in economic activity of serious
proportions unless more positive
governmental programs are developed
while the solution adopted the more
positive governmental programs was
expansion of the military the problem
was this is early nineteen fifty but the
problem was that the Congress would not
give Truman the additional billions of
dollars that he wanted for this new
program the program outlined in NSC 68
that was because it was unpopular people
didn't want to pay all those taxes that
it would require and it would require
something like tripling or quadrupling
the military budget he could not get the
money from Congress and the only way he
finally got it was through the Korean
War and the similarities between what
has happened in the Gulf 1990-1991 and
what happened in Korea in 1950 are
really very striking
many of you don't or won't recall what
happened in Korea but in June of 1950
the North Korean forces entered from the
north to the South Korea as a country
had been split it had been partitioned
and divided at the 38th parallel by the
United States in the Soviet Union in
1945 it had been occupied for a couple
of generations by the Japanese and with
the defeat of the Japanese the Soviets
entered in the north the United States
entered from the south and in agreement
between the two countries Gloria was
supposedly temporarily divided at the
38th parallel and this United States set
up a dictatorship really in the south
and the Soviets set up a government in
the north a communist government while
it was the communist troops communist
troops who moved to the south in June
1950 and these South Korean forces
retreated more or less inviting them to
follow themselves in the United Nations
just as in the case of the Gulf the
United States obtained a series of
resolutions through the Nationals
through the UN Security Council formed a
coalition of military forces with the
United States providing probably 98% or
95% of the coalition to restore
independence to South Korea and to expel
the North Koreans from South Korea this
had been achieved by September of 1950
but Truman decided to go far beyond the
sank so far beyond the provisions of the
UN Security Council resolutions he
should have stopped according to those
resolutions at the 38th parallel that
would have been the end of it North
Korea Korea would have been expelled
from the south and the military action
would have ended but Truman had another
plan in order to get his programs of NSC
68 the rearmament programs in the US and
Western Europe through Congress he
decided to invade North Korea and he did
this in early October of 1950 advancing
rapidly to the north toward the Yellow
River which is the boundary between
China which had
then taken over by the the Communists
the year before and North Korea the
Chinese Communists warned that if they
didn't stop heading toward China that
China would enter the war they did not
stop that is the u.s. didn't stop and
the Chinese did enter the war they
poured hundreds of thousands eventually
a million troops across the border into
North Korea to stop the United States
there and by November US troops were
retreating to the south and the US media
was full of pictures and stories about
the u.s. soldiers and Marines retreating
through ice and snow before these
advancing hordes of communist Chinese
troops I remember very well I was in
high school then well the war went on
for three more years after it could have
stopped as a result there was something
like 34,000 Americans killed in that war
more than 100,000 were wounded and the
entire toll of the war was measured in
the the millions but it did provide
Truman with the leverage he needed to
get rearmament through Congress as a
result of his manipulation of the Korean
War US military expenditures expanded
really quite dramatically for example
and as a matter of fact what Truman did
was in early December he went on
national radio and he declared a state
of national emergency and his his Bush's
words about our way of life being at
stake or what reminded me of what Truman
had said back in 1950 he went on
national radio mustered all the hype and
emotion he could he said our homes our
nation all the things that we believe in
are in great danger
this danger comes or has been created by
the rulers of the Soviet Union he also
called again for massive increases in
military spending for US and European
forces quite apart from the needs in
Korea well by this time and in the
following Congress did agree as a result
during the first two years after 1950 US
military spending in more than tripled
from 13 billion dollars to forty four
billion dollars and the forces the
people under in the military more than
doubled to three point six million this
was the beginning of the militarism that
has followed without restraint for 41
years now and it was all based on the
so-called Soviet threat there was no
Soviet threat in 1950 when Truman
attributed the Korean War to the Soviets
that was a ruse in order to create
emotional hysteria a false threat and to
get the leverage over Congress needed
for those military programs and the
whole military program then is what some
people call military Keynesianism which
is massive government spending on
military programs in order to generate
activity in the economy the problem in
those days was that Western Europe could
not import sufficiently from the United
States in order to sustain the US
economy there weren't enough dollars in
Europe it was a so-called period of the
period of the so-called dollar gap and
so this whole u.s. financing of the
remittitur remilitarization of Western
Europe was done through what they called
defense support grants and this money in
turn generated the exports from the
United States to Western Europe that
would then sustain the US economy this
is what we've been living ever since and
it's the reason why I say that this
crisis in Western Europe that has now
largely disappeared the east-west
dimension of the Cold War needed another
crisis if the military spending within
the United States was to be continued
and I think that Bush very likely saw
the crisis area as the Persian Gulf what
better place could he find than the
region where something like 65 percent
of the world's petroleum resources are
located Hussein happened to be just the
right guy for this crisis
you know that the United States
supported Hussein all through this war
with Iran the CIA gave him the real-time
military intelligence on the movements
of Iranian military units for assistance
to the Iraqi army the United States
became Iraq's largest trading partner
with billions and billions of dollars of
credits official credits from agencies
like the export-import Bank in
Washington in order to provide exports
from the United States to Iraq there
were all of these different programs in
which the United States was going all
out to support Saddam Hussein why
because Sudan who sane at that time was
serving as a buffer in his war against
Iran he was preventing the spread of
Islamic fundamentalism into the Arab
countries of the Persian Gulf keeping in
mind that Iran Iran is not an Arab
country but they were very active in
trying to foment fundamentalist
rebellion through the Shiite populations
of the Arab Persian Gulf countries and
so the United States Kuwait Saudi Arabia
all supported Iraq in the war with Iran
how could this crisis be created through
Hussein well one of the ways was to make
Hussein think that he could take over
Kuwait with impunity it was quite well
known in Washington that Iraq had a long
historical claim on Kuwait Kuwait had in
fact for centuries belonged to the
southern province of Iraq the Basra
province that was under the Turkish
Ottoman Empire but with the collapse of
the Turks after World War one the French
and the British moved into those areas
of the Arab world that the Turks had
controlled through his empire before the
French mostly into Lebanon in Syria but
the British moved in a very big way in
the Persian Gulf and in 1922 Sir Percy
Cox the British High Commissioner in
Baghdad
drew for the first time in history the
lines in the sand delineating the
borders between Jordan Iraq Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia and so doing he drew the
line in purposely the documentation
later proved it he drew the line
purposely to deprive Iraq of a viable
seaport on the Persian Gulf
they're only seaport of any importance
would be Basra which is about 60 miles
up the Shatt al-arab the estuary of the
Tigris and the Euphrates rivers
well the Iraqis never recognized
formally the separation of Kuwait from
the southern province and that was one
of the historical claims that Hussein
had had and the Iraqis had had all along
in 1961 when the British who had created
no less than 10 colonies in the Persian
Gulf
including Kuwait in the 20s when in 1961
the British gave independence to Kuwait
the Iraqis massed troops along the
border with Kuwait threatening to take
to territory backed by force and the
British then rushed military forces to
Kuwait and the Iraqis back down but the
Iraqis threatened to do the very same
thing in 1972 and 1976 so there is this
long fairly long historical claims that
the Iraqis have had on Kuwait for since
the 1920s but there were more immediate
grievances as well one was Kuwaiti
overproduction which had forced the
world oil price down it was it was
strangling the Iraqi economy going into
July of last year Iraq had a debt of
something like 80 billion dollars from
its war with Iran most of that was owed
to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia which as I
said had supported Iraq the Iraqis
wanted forgiveness of those loans there
was and the Kuwaitis wouldn't do it
there was also the question of
overproduction which I mentioned
moment ago in 1986 the OPEC countries
had set $18 as the world price for oil
and they had set quotas for maintaining
that price but the Kuwait ease and the
United Arab Emirates had for a long time
been over producing which had forced the
price way down to as low as $14.99 well
this happened to be the best price that
the Western industrialized countries
like the United States had been getting
in constant dollars for the past 40
years
that was another grievance and the third
grievance was the Seaport question Iraq
for quite some time had been insisting
that Kuwait least to Iraq to small
uninhabited islands called boo beyond
Anwar bah which are at the very top of
the Persian Gulf and which are just
across from the Iraqi Kuwait border and
Kuwait refused to do that to so that on
August 1st
Kuwaiti and Iraqi negotiators met in
Saudi Arabia the Kuwaitis refused to
compromise and the next day Hussein
invaded what was the United States doing
all this time well very interesting some
of the things that have come out in
April of last year and these are the
indicators which suggest that the Bush
administration needed this crisis and
encouraged to seyn to think he could get
away with invading Kuwait in April the
Assistant Secretary of State for the
Middle East
John Kelly testified before Congress
about various affairs and among other
things he asserted that the United
States has no commitment to defend
Kuwait the Secretary of State in 1950
in January of that year also had said
this was Dean Acheson he had also said
that the United States had no commitment
to defend South Korea he put South Korea
outside the u.s. defense perimeter in
Asia another similarity in July the OPEC
oil ministers met in Geneva and Iraq
insisted on raising the price and they
agreed to raise it from 18 from 1986 to
$21 last July at that time Iraq massed
30,000 troops on the Kuwaiti border to
pressure Kuwait into accepting this
demand for a higher price and also new
quotas so that the price would be
maintained worldwide and Kuwait also
agreed to stop over producing as did the
United Arab Emirates all this background
is very important for understanding the
u.s. position following that meeting in
Geneva of the OPEC oil ministers instead
of withdrawing the troops from the
border since he got his way Hussein more
than tripled the troops to 100,000 on
April on July 25th the US ambassador met
with Hussein for the first time in a
long time
her name is April Glaspie she meets the
same and among other things tells him
this and this comes from a transcript of
the meeting which apparently the Iraqis
recorded in in secrecy but then then
made public they they transcribed it and
it was translated from from English and
Arabic she said I have a direct
instruction from Secretary of State
Baker to emphasize to you and this is
almost word-for-word to emphasize to you
that the United States has quote/unquote
no opinion on your disputes with Kuwait
she also said I have aid an instruction
from President Bush to seek better
relations with Iraq for his part Hussein
told her in so many words that he was
going to take extremely strong action
against Kuwait because he
the Kuwaitis were carrying out economic
war against Iraq through their
overproduction and their refusal to
compromise on the other matters well
with 100,000 troops massed on the
Kuwaiti border and the ambassador's
meeting with the president not one word
was said of warning that he should not
take action against Kuwait in terms of
an invasion because that's just what he
was threatening to do US intelligence
satellite reconnaissance had all these
units identified and located along the
border two days before the invasion this
Assistant Secretary of State John Kelly
again testifies in Congress that the
United States has no commitment to
defend Kuwait and at the same time he
had canceled a Voice of America
broadcast which would have stated that
the United States was would defend its
friends in the Gulf including Kuwait
that was cancelled well put all of those
things together and there was no warning
from bush at all what we would have our
oppression would have been that it was
an enormous surprise well it was no
surprise at all they knew it was coming
senator Boren who is chairman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee has stated
that the CIA five six seven days before
the invasion was predicting that it was
going to happen at any minute well
during that week between the
ambassador's meeting with the same and
the invasion on August 2nd there are
plenty of things that could have been
done to stop it and that is why I feel
very strongly that those 100,000 to
200,000 Iraqis who are now dead plus the
Americans and others who've been killed
didn't have to die at all this whole
crisis and war could have been avoided
if Bush had wanted to during that week
before the invasion he could have called
for an emergency meeting of the UN
Security Council and resolutions warning
what the consequences would be
he could have organized a multinational
military force to send to Kuwait just as
the British had done back in 1961 when
the Iraq
were threatening at the time they gave
Kuwait independence there could have
been public warnings there were all
sorts of things that could have happened
during that week but you know what Bush
was doing he was in Maine boating
fishing playing golf just demonstrating
I suppose you could say that way of life
that he said was at stake well so much
for the invasion I think the war
certainly could have been avoided but
there is another factor involved too and
that is the north/south dimension of the
Cold War
you've all heard that he's talking about
a new international order or a new world
order that should come out that must
come out of this Gulf crisis well it
seems to me that what he's talking about
really is simply an institutionalization
of the old north/south dimension of the
Cold War
you know most people when speaking of
the Cold War would have thought us-nato
Soviet Warsaw Pact Europe as the theater
and that that was really the Cold War
this standoff this military standoff in
Western Europe well that was only a part
of it there was always a north/south
dimension to the Cold War this was the
war against the so-called third world
for resources for markets and for labor
this is where the fighting actually took
place as in Vietnam that too is a
dimension of the Cold War that has been
with us since the late 1940s this is
where I was working in the CIA in the
north/south dimension I was in Latin
America and there was a cold war going
on there day and night and that's what I
was working in as a CIA officer well it
goes on still today it hasn't diminished
in the least it continues with all its
racist content this north/south
dimension and that in my interpretation
is what Bush wants to continue because
the u.s. is no less dependent on the
importation of
raw materials and products which we
don't have ourselves then the United
States was back in 1950 well the CIA all
through these years these 40 odd years
in fact more now it would be 44 years
since sniffing of the agency was a major
instrument a very important instrument
in the Cold War both east-west and
north-south the CIA for those who don't
know was established in 1947 under the
National Security Act of that year this
law established the National Security
Council or NSC as the highest
policymaking body in matters of national
security defense and foreign affairs the
same laws in effect today and the
National Security Council according to
the law is chaired by the President of
the United States it has as statutory
members the Vice President the Secretary
of State Secretary of Defense and
several others of that very high level
the same law set up the CIA as the
National Intelligence Agency or National
Intelligence Service and as an
instrument of the President and the
National Security Council the purpose
intelligence service obviously but from
the very beginning the CIA did that but
much more at the very first meeting of
the National Security Council this is
October 1947 the month after Truman
signs the law into effect at the very
first meeting of the NSC the decision is
taken to set aside ten million dollars
to intervene secretly in these Italian
elections coming up six months later I
mean to buy the elections the elections
were scheduled for April 1948 and
starting in October the CIA began to
spend his money they passed the money
out through Italian American
organizations through front
organizations in Italy and through the
Vatican and as a result and all money
went to the Christian Democrats the
reason was that a coalition had been
formed between communists and socialists
and these political forces had been the
backbone of the resistance to more than
years of fascism in Italy so they came
out of the of World War two with great
prestige and with a lot of strength it
was called the popular bloc and the fear
in Washington was that they would win
those elections they didn't it didn't
matter to them that the Italian people
should really decide and so they went in
and financed the Christian Democrats who
in the end in April 1948 one very easily
but that wasn't the beginning in the end
of the CIA substituted to the Christian
Democratic Party in Italy during the
next 25 years the CIA passed out more
than 100 bill one hundred million
dollars to the Christian Democrats in
Italy and they ever since those first
elections in 1948 they have dominated
every single one of the many
government's I think it's more than 40
now there right now negotiating the
formation of still another one they have
dominated every one of those governments
the Christian Democrats or not to be
confused they are of conservative
basically conservative party well the
agency was involved in all sorts of
other activities such as that which came
to be known as covered action covered
action is the way the CIA all through
these years has intervened secretly in
the affairs of other countries in order
to influence the course of events in
those countries and this is all around
the world the agency also was called
upon to foment or to mount paramilitary
operations against Eastern Europe these
were done through the recruitment of
refugees so-called displaced persons
after World War two they were
interviewed in the camps in Western
Europe mostly in what is became West
Germany and they were then selected and
trained and dispatched back to every
single one of the countries in Eastern
Europe in order to carry out sabotage to
impede the reconstruction from the
devastation of World War two in order to
foment rebellion carry out
assassinations all kinds of things like
that every single one of the Eastern
European countries for ten years at
least from about 1947 to 57 was the
target of these operations
other operations such as the founding
and or the establishment and
manipulation and control of trade unions
all over the world another area is media
media operations in the CIA have been
extremely important all through the
years these are operations in which the
CIA pays a journalist usually a foreign
journalist to publish the CIA's material
as if it were the journalists own these
operations have been vast and all around
the world were there CIA CIA operations
there is an officer in the CIA station
or office who is in charge of media
operations still another area and this
is where the CIA gets into very
unpleasant or slimy activities is in the
liaison operations liaison operations
are all those activities undertaken with
a security or intelligence service of
another country these two had their
beginning right at the beginning the
main liaison service was with which the
CIA worked at the beginning was the
British intelligence service they had in
fact helped to found and trained the
world war two predecessor agency to the
CIA called the Office of Strategic
Services well the British was a very
were a very important service for the
CIA at the beginning but early on the
agency began to establish the security
and intelligence services of other
countries Greece was one of the first
places they did this there was a civil
war in Greece for those who don't know
1947 1949 civil war between the
arch-conservative forces backed by the
United States and Britain and the
Communists who had been the resistance
forces to the Nazi occupation of Greece
the US side won the war and in the
aftermath the CIA set up a security
service which was called the KY P or
keep KY P being the Greek letters for
CIA they gave it the same name and this
security service was used by the CIA for
about 20 years really
to keep the Conservatives in power in
Greece in 1967 when their power was
threatened through upcoming elections
the CIA plotted with this local security
service which was quasi-military and
fomented a coup a military coup against
the elected civilian government that
ushered in have started seven years of
military and military fascist
dictatorship in Greece it was known as
the Colonel's regime and the very first
president of this Colonels regime was
george papadapolis an army colonel who
had been the chief KY p liaison officer
with the CIA station in athens
there are many other examples one could
go all around the world to Vietnam to
Latin America where I did his work to
Africa where the CIA has worked with
these other security services I'll give
one recent example and that is Honduras
in the early 1980s the CIA established a
unit of the Honduran army called
battalion battalion 106 I believe it was
called it was trained in Texas by the
agency this was then sent people were
sent back to Honduras and there they
became an official death squad in
Honduras they are responsible for the
murder and disappearance of hundreds of
people in Honduras during the 1980s this
has all been made public by lawsuits
brought against the Honduran government
by the survivors of these people who
were murdered by this this desk was set
up by the CIA within the Honduran army
there are lawsuits which were brought
against Honduras in the inter-american
Court for human rights in San Jose Costa
Rica
that's the judicial arm of the
Organization of American States and in
fact these survivors have won a number
of cases against the government and the
Honduran government has agreed to pay
damages to the survivors in 1954 to cite
another type of operation the CIA
overthrew a democratically elected
civilian government
Guatemala and this was done in many
other countries besides but I want to
mention Guatemala because it's very
special this was a reformist government
who had carried out a series of reforms
agrarian reform was one of them and the
CIA was called upon to overthrow that
government because it had affected the
grain reform had affected the lands of
the United Fruit Company based in Boston
and it happened that the law firm of the
United Fruit was Sullivan and Cromwell a
Wall Street firm which numbered among
its partners John Foster Dulles who at
the time was Secretary of State and
Allen Dulles his brother who was the
director of the CIA the CIA through
deception operations and paramilitary
operations overthrew that government and
established a military dictatorship in
Guatemala that has continued to this day
there have been a number of civilian
governments which have been figureheads
really like the president who just left
power today so but the military has
ruled Guatemala
ever since the CIA's intervention in
1954 as a result because of the agency's
work with these security services in
Guatemala more than 100,000 people have
been killed
I mean extra dude judicially killed
they've been disappeared they've been
tortured to death
they've been murdered in one way or
another bodies thrown down on the
highway
wherever no one knows how many people
and know will probably ever know really
how many people in Guatemala have been
murdered this way by the military
dictatorship established by the CIA is
46 years 47 years of this several
generations have passed during that
period and today Guatemala is still one
of the most repressive countries in
whole world in terms of political
repression well I mentioned these things
because I better mention El Salvador as
well because that's a similar case you
know the South United States says back
to El Salvador
that is the governments of else al
door whether military or conservative or
Christian Democrat over the last 10
years or more in every possible way this
has to include assistance to the
military and the death squads in El
Salvador the way it works is these death
squads are really military and security
people who operate not officially but in
their role as security officials in
other words they are part and parcel of
the official security forces and they
get lists of people they go out and they
murder anyone who is a potential student
leader trade unions unionist unionist
human rights activist and this has
resulted in these years 10 years or so
of us support in the deaths of more than
70,000 people in El Salvador alone well
the question I think has to be asked why
do we do these things as a country or as
a society it's no good if to stand up
here and describe these things as they
happen and all of the things I'm telling
you and much much more are in books it's
all there for the learning it only takes
the reading but the question really has
to be asked I think why do we do these
things as a country when I was a trainee
in the CIA in the 50s as a young man I
was taught that the Soviet Union's
foreign policy its expansionism it's a
aggressiveness belligerent zone around
the world was a direct product of its
domestic system that is the conditions
needed for the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union to maintain a monopoly on
political power in that country I think
any any political scientists would agree
that any societies or any nations
activities abroad or foreign policy
tinnie has to be a direct product or
result of its domestic system so that to
answer the question of why we do these
things abroad we have to look I think at
our system here at home
when I was when I came back in 1987
after those 17 years without a single
visit something very special was taking
place here do you remember what was
happening in 1987 we were having we were
celebrating the 200th anniversary of the
Constitution that document that sets the
rules of the game for the domestic
system in the United States it may be
200 years old there may have been 20 odd
amendments and 200 years of legislation
but it is still the basic rules of the
game for the system in the United States
and as I watch that that what seemed to
me an orgy of self-congratulation about
that document in 1987 I was reminded of
a passage in one of young Noam Chomsky's
up books it was on Central America's
called turning the tide in that book he
has a section in which he discusses the
1787 Constitutional Convention in
Philadelphia where those 55 men met in
total secrecy more than 50 years past
you know before word one of what they
said at Philadelphia got out was because
they had to keep it all secret it was a
plot well during that convention the
question arose who really is to govern
the United States they were seeking
solutions you know to problems in
governing governing under the Articles
of Confederation and the question arose
who really is to govern these United
States and John Jay had the answer John
Jay you'll remember was the president of
the Continental Congress that had fought
the war for independence and he was also
first Chief Justice of the United States
on the Supreme Court John Jay said of
course the people who own the United
States ought to govern it and his
position was adopted the Constitution
was written so that political power in
the United States would be in the hands
of the people who owned the country
who were those 55 men and those they've
represented at Philadelphia they were
the merchants the lawyers the bankers
landowners slaveholders and so forth the
elite of colonial society they wrote the
Constitution in order to preserve and
enhance their personal wealth there is a
book called toward an American
Revolution which I tell people
everywhere I go could be the best ten
dollars they would spend on a book
during four or five or six years in
college or university it's by Gerry
Fraser at PhD from UMass at Amherst
it's a story of the Constitution and
where it came from
about the men who had Philadelphia their
backgrounds and the discussion that he
was able to pick up through research and
especially the way the Constitution was
crammed down the throat of the states
for ratification the only state you know
that had any referendum on the
Constitution referendum in the sense of
those few people who could vote because
the founding fathers you know had begun
the Constitution with the words we the
people of the United States and they had
the gall to write that just when they
had written totally out of the political
process 94 95 percent of the people they
had written out all the indentured
laborers all the men without property
all of the the Native Americans they
considered savages all of the
african-americans because they were
slaves mostly and of course half the
population all the women and so there
were only five or six or perhaps seven
percent of Americans at that time who
could even participate in the political
process but they started the
Constitution we the people of the United
States well the point is that this book
about the Constitution points out that
Rhode Island was the only state that had
a referendum and of those few people who
could vote the Constitution lost
thirteen to one and it probably would
have lost in a majority of the other
states if there had been such a type of
referendum but the point is that this
was the original setting out of the rule
of the game it is the original compact
between the political forces in the
United States to keep the political
debate as narrow as possible and it was
written in order to make these rules of
the game as hard to change as possible
it is the root of the situation we're in
today when we go out to vote and we are
going to select between Republicans and
Democrats were really only choosing
between on the one hand usually
Tweedledum and the other Tweedledee
because the two parties have such narrow
positions imagination can think of many
many different ways of running the
country of having a government but the
Constitution keeps it very very narrow
and it enshrines that very first human
right in the United States to the
detriment of all the others others
meaning right to education to proper
health care and the rest but it
enshrines this one right to the
accumulation and use of private property
and all of the power that goes with it
it is one of the reasons why we have a
domestic system such system which today
is in extreme crisis I don't think I
have to go through the litany of crises
that we have in the United States today
everyone knows we have one in three in
this country that is illiterate we have
the worst educational system in the
whole developed world all the industrial
world and you've all seen I'm sure the
results of these tests that are given or
the polls that are given to people in
the United States and so what they know
about geography or mathematics or
anything else but we also have one in
three in the United States who cannot
read or write
they're either totally illiterate or to
the degree that they cannot function in
a society based on the written word we
have one in three that's living in
poverty or so close or in and out that
they have no relief from what one in
three Americans don't even register to
vote and of those who do register to
vote 20% of those don't vote that yields
a situation in which only 50% of the
eligible voters vote
national elections and we have a
president elected then by something like
24 to 25 percent of the eligible voters
there are many other crises that we know
the problem of a of a prevention and
cure for AIDS or we have problems of
racism which is so which permeates our
society so much or violence of every
sort there are crises and crises and
more crises in this country and of
course the rules of the game which have
produced these crises in my estimate is
the Constitution and it goes back that
far but the Fraser book appear on the
table I recommend to everyone to read
where the government comes from and how
we have a system today that requires
these types of activities abroad how
because if we had real peace in the
world if we had no great great crisis
like the east-west priced east-west
crisis in Western Europe or north-south
Persian Gulf
if these crisis did not exist there
would be no justification for this huge
huge military budget two thirds or so or
even if it were 50 percent it would be
just enormous military budget we
wouldn't be able to justify that or the
leaders of the country would not be able
to justify that what would that mean it
would mean whatever Ben everyone has
been talking about peace dividend
conversion of the economy to human
purposes to peaceful purposes it would
mean solving problems like the
educational crisis solving problems like
the health crisis where 40 million
Americans don't even have health
insurance the only advanced country the
only country in the developed world that
does not have a national health program
if all those military expenditures were
going for human purposes then there
might be a real threat of real democracy
in the United States because then we
would have an educated population we
would have people who would want to
participate in the political process
people would register to vote there
would be a possibility
probably for the formation of a second
party I sometimes make mistake and say a
third party but it's a second party
really or a third party or fourth all
kinds of things could happen and that is
why the military spending justified
falsely on foreign crises is a way of
preventing real democracy and reform of
the domestic system in the United States
and it is this domestic system then that
produces these grisly activities abroad
that I have already mentioned well
question arises finally at the end what
to do about this what can all of us do
if we're concerned and that's not an
easy question to answer we have failed
to stop the war but I don't think that
means that people should be so
disappointed that they would not want to
continue one of most important things I
think to do is to keep mobilized I don't
know whether you're you have
organizations here that were part of the
student and youth coalition formed when
the anti-war movement developed but that
was a National Coalition of student
youth groups I think of something like
28 or 30 groups including the
progressive student Network student
action Union DSA and a whole lot more
and I certainly hope that those groups
will will keep together that keep the
coalition together and also keep the the
nationwide anti-war coalition's to stop
the next intervention solidarity is
certainly a very important thing to keep
going solidarity with the FMLN in El
Salvador right now when there is a real
possibility perhaps for a ceasefire but
the FMLN and the Salvadoran people they
need us
solidarity now as much as they ever did
the same applies to Nicaragua where
thanks to the Reagan Bush administration
more than 30,000 people worker killed
during that contra operation of the
1980s
you know what 30,000 people is it is 1%
of the population of
agua imagine if 1% of the US population
were killed in a terrorist war that
would be 2.5 million people one time in
Madrid I went down to the US Embassy's a
library and I looked up the figures for
all the Americans killed in every war
since a civil war or every military
action and it only came to about I think
1.3 million or something like that and
that's over more than 100 years but in
Nicaragua in the space of 7 years thanks
to the US we killed thanks to the Bush
Reagan administration 1% of the
population were killed well it was a
tragedy visited on Nicaragua and the
Nicaraguan certainly need our solidarity
as well another thing really is constant
study of politics and what's going on in
the world it is not enough simply to
come and listen to me to speak for an
hour and then have a discussion and then
that's the end of it that is why it is
so important to take a look at the books
and the publications because wonderful
stuff is being published and we have to
keep studying we have to keep reading
the only way to get it is through
reading reading television will not give
it to us radio will not the only way you
get it is through reading and nobody can
keep a commitment on the long term or
for the long haul without continually
renewing the ideological intellectual
basis for the action that we all take
but when you talk about books you really
have to be very careful never must we
forget or should we forget what
congressman Harold well they had to say
about books this is one of Howard Zinn's
joules of research but Howard found that
Harold velde who was a congressman from
Illinois in the 1950s when I was a
university student he was speaking in
the House of Representatives get this in
opposition to the mobile public library
services for rural America opposition he
said educating Americans through the
library service could bring about a
change of their political attitude
quicker than any
other method the basis of communism and
socialist ik influence is education of
the people you can find it in the
Congressional Record there's one more
thing though really that all of us can
do and that is to spread the truth about
Bush's lies and hypocrisy on the Gulf
and his bombing of Iraq back to the
pre-industrial age for no reason but his
own reelection and the continuation of
militarism in the United States and when
he does run for production we have to
reject his boast that he made the world
safe from Saddam Hussein and we must
eject him from the White House in order
to make the world safe from George Bush
thank you very much